blog: add 10 Years of Wasm (#140)
bytecodealliance/bytecodealliance.org: _posts/2026-01-22-ten-years-of-webassembly-a-retrospective.md

---
title: "10 Years of Wasm: A Retrospective"
author: "Eric Gregory"
github_name: "ericgregory"
---

> In April of 2015, Luke Wagner made the first commits to a new repository called `WebAssembly`, adding a [high-level design document](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/commit/12ee148fb5cfa33331dbffadae06752b1759a7bf) for a "binary format to serve as a web compilation target."

Reviewer: Maybe this is too pedantic, but technically the repository was `design` and the GH org was `WebAssembly`.

> Four years later, in December 2019, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [officially embraced WebAssembly (Wasm) as the "fourth language of the web"](https://www.w3.org/press-releases/2019/wasm/). Today, Wasm is used in web applications like [Google Earth](https://web.dev/case-studies/earth-webassembly), streaming video services like [Amazon Prime Video](https://www.amazon.science/blog/how-prime-video-updates-its-app-for-more-than-8-000-device-types) and [Disney Plus](https://medium.com/disney-streaming/introducing-the-disney-application-development-kit-adk-ad85ca139073), and game engines like [Unity](https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.0/Documentation/Manual/webassembly-2023.html). 

Reviewer 2: Maybe include some of the prominent BA users/usecases here, like FaaS/serverless platforms? Seems weird for the BA to publish a blog post omitting the stuff that is important to its member orgs.

Author: Makes sense -- tried to expand this a bit, curious what you think

Reviewer 2: Looks good, thanks!

> Four years later, in December 2019, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [officially embraced WebAssembly (Wasm) as the "fourth language of the web"](https://www.w3.org/press-releases/2019/wasm/). Today, Wasm is used in web applications like [Google Earth](https://web.dev/case-studies/earth-webassembly), streaming video services like [Amazon Prime Video](https://www.amazon.science/blog/how-prime-video-updates-its-app-for-more-than-8-000-device-types) and [Disney Plus](https://medium.com/disney-streaming/introducing-the-disney-application-development-kit-adk-ad85ca139073), and game engines like [Unity](https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.0/Documentation/Manual/webassembly-2023.html). Wasm runs on countless embedded devices, and cloud computing providers use Wasm to provide Functions-as-a-Service (FaaS) and serverless functionality.

Reviewer: Maybe also add "and [Adobe Photoshop](https://web.dev/articles/ps-on-the-web)" to have 2 webapp examples to complement the 2 streaming apps.

Author: Great addition, done!

> The road to standardization (and understated ubiquity) would require the teams behind the major browsers to unite behind an approach that Wagner looks back on as "super hacky&mdash;*hilariously* hacky." 

Reviewer: I think *asm.js* was super hacky, but what browsers united behind was not asm.js, but the newer cleaner thing that removed the hack (WebAssembly).  The story hasn't yet introduced "asm.js", so maybe best to drop mention of me and hackiness at the end of this sentence and saying something more like "unite behind an approach to solve a problem that many had tried, and failed, to solve before."

Reviewer 3: We kinda aligned behind the super hack… asm.js… and disposed of it 😉

For the ten-year anniversary of the project (well, ten and change), I spoke to many of the co-designers who were there at the beginning. They were generous enough to share their memories of the project's origins, and what they imagine for the next ten years of WebAssembly.

## The trusted call stack

> In March of 2013, a group of Mozilla engineers including Wagner, Alon Zakai, and David Herman released [Asm.js](http://asmjs.org/). The open source project operated as a subset of JavaScript, embedding a static type system into a dynamically typed language (that is, JavaScript) to enable *better*-than-JS performance for compiled code running in the browser. "Super hacky," in Wagner's words.

Reviewer: Technically asm.js wasn't an open source project; it was a pseudo-standard defining a subset of an existing standard (JS).  Maybe replace the second sentence with "Asm.js defined a subset of the existing JavaScript language that implicitly embeds enough static type information to allow a browser's existing JS engine to achieve much better performance once the optimizer knew to look for it."

> In March of 2013, a group of Mozilla engineers including Wagner, Alon Zakai, and David Herman released [Asm.js](http://asmjs.org/). Asm.js defined a subset of the existing JavaScript language that implicitly embeds enough static type information to allow a browser's existing JS engine to achieve much better performance once the optimizer knew to look for it. "Super hacky," in Wagner's words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In March of 2013, a group of Mozilla engineers including Wagner, Alon Zakai, and Dave Herman released [Asm.js](http://asmjs.org/). Asm.js defined a subset of the existing JavaScript language that implicitly embeds enough static type information to allow a browser's existing JS engine to achieve much better performance once the optimizer knew to look for it. "Super hacky," in Wagner's words.
```

Meanwhile, Google was developing [Native Client (NaCl)](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/native-client/) and its successor  [Portable Native Client (PNaCl)](https://chrome.jscn.org/docs/native-client/nacl-and-pnacl/#portable-native-client-pnacl), to sandbox and run native code in Chrome. 

> JF Bastien was on the Chrome team at the time, where he helped finalize the design for NaCl and ship it. According to Bastien, NaCl was a secure sandbox, but it wasn't portable, and didn't "fully respect the ethos of the web." The successor, PNaCl, treated the browser as a plugin host rather than an integrated environment. "There were a lot of interesting ideas in there," Bastien says. "But it was perceived as trying to stomp on JavaScript, where really what we needed was *performance*."

Reviewer 3: Technically I joined to finish the Armv7 version of NaCl. The x86 version already existed.

> PNaCl placed the program's call stack in its own memory space&mdash;a reasonable choice for sandboxing, but one that made it difficult for JavaScript to call PNaCl code or vice versa. The connection between PNaCl and the rest of the browser relied on message passing, which required an entirely separate API surface for graphics, audio, and networking. This created an obstacle to broader adoption. If PNaCl was going to serve as the basis for a multi-browser approach to native code on the web, what standards body would govern the APIs?

Reviewer 3: I think the call stack description here is confusing. Later you explain that it’s in a separate process. That’s really the source of original friction because it effectively requires asynchronous calls. Whereas asm.js and then Wasm are a smoother interface to JS because they’re synchronous. Way easier to get started, and get all the Web APIs!

So NaCl and PNaCl were trying to jump straight to async because the security model was easier that way… without sufficient care for interop with JS, nor consensus building on new APIs.

Reviewer: I do believe that a fairly impactful and somewhat unique technical design choice of wasm (inherited from asm.js which had the design choice forced on it) is that wasm loads and stores cannot touch the native call stack (return addresses, spilled registers, etc).  This is the foundation of wasm's portability (b/c what's on the stack is CPU-/VM-dependent) as well as wasm's especially-lightweight sandboxing (calls into and out of wasm have far less work to do than otherwise).  So I agree with the emphasis placed on the "Trusted Call Stack" in this section; it's also an interesting case where the path through asm.js led wasm to a point in the technical space that wasm might not have arrived at from first principles.

Reviewer 3: Oh absolutely! What I mean is that NaCl has a per-thread trusted stack, but this part of the article makes it sound like a *downside*. Whereas having a trusted stack has huge advantages which Wasm also uses. The issue with JS↔NaCl isn't the stack, it's the process separation.

Here:
```suggestion
PNaCl placed the untrusted code in a separate process from the rest of the web page and its JavaScript&mdash;a reasonable choice for sandboxing, but one that made it difficult for JavaScript to call PNaCl code or vice versa. The connection between PNaCl and the rest of the browser relied on message passing, which required an entirely separate API surface for graphics, audio, and networking. It also forced asynchrony as a programming model, a huge lift to do successfully. This created obstacles to broader adoption. If PNaCl was going to serve as the basis for a multi-browser approach to native code on the web, what standards body would govern the APIs?
```

Maybe the suggestion clarified my meaning?

Reviewer: I had thought that (P)NaCl had the native stack live in the heap, and so loads and stores could access and mutate it, and this is why (P)NaCl didn't need Emscripten's shadow-stack technique for address-taken locals and also why (P)NaCl needed to make every X- (16?)-byte instruction offset a valid jump target b/c return addresses could be mutated on the native stack by the guest program.  This is the key distinction with wasm, I believe.

Reviewer: Supporting this key distinction and terminology: [here's a presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RD3bxsBfTZOIfrlq7HzGMsygPHgb61A1eTdelIYOurs/htmlpresent) by the (P)NaCl team about a prototype (that, iiuc, never shipped) called MinSFI that, in that slide deck, uses the term "Trusted call stack" to describe the key property I'm describing which the slide mention is a property of asm.js but not normal (P)NaCl.

Reviewer: Perhaps then a minimal tweak to your suggested change (which otherwise looks great) that I'd suggest would be: "PNaCl placed the untrusted code, its heap and its call stack in a separate process ...".

Reviewer 3: Right, my point here is that "separate call stack" is not a downside, or at least not the one that seems to be implied here. I think you're focusing on the call stack that *not* separate, which indeed Wasm and asm.js also have a bit of (for address-taken variables and alloca), but that's not mentioned in this writeup. I don't think it should be either, it's a lot of detail that'll be confusing.

[The NaCl paper has details](https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//pubs/archive/34913.pdf) (and PNaCl is built on NaCl):

> Note that the per-thread trusted stack resides outside the untrusted address space, to protect it from attack by other threads in the untrusted NaCl module.

So my point is still: the main downside PNaCl and NaCl have are being in a separate process.

Reviewer: > Right, my point here is that "separate call stack" is not a downside, ...

I'm not sure what the phrase "separate call stack" precisely means or how it relates to what we're talking about, which is a "trusted call stack" in which the untrusted guest code cannot read or write to the contents of the native stack and thus the host can trust that the return address and other stack contents cannot be corrupted.  That's the section title and a number of researchers and engineers have independently come to the conclusion that this is a subtle but very impactful technical design choice for wasm, so it does seem appropriate as-is (with edits as suggested above).

Reviewer 3: Ah! I think we're talking past each other because of my own misreading which I just realized. The text said:

> PNaCl placed the program's call stack in its own memory space

and there's a load-bearing "its" here. I read the its-ing as appertaining to the call stack (hence my thinking that this was about the trusted stack NaCl has, it is in its own memory space), but now I understand the intent was that PNaCl is what the its-ing was appertaining to.

So, the edit clears that up and I think I now understand what you were saying as well :)

Asm.js took a different approach, which Dan Gohman&mdash;then at Mozilla&mdash;describes as a "trusted call stack," where compiled code and JavaScript could share the same stack. 

> "That means Asm.js was able to kind of coexist with JavaScript," he says. "You can call into JavaScript, and JavaScript can call into you." This design decision&mdash;later inherited by WebAssembly&mdash;would prove foundational, enabling everything from seamless browser integration to the Component Model's vision of calling across isolation boundaries.

Reviewer 2: Suggest tweaking the end of this paragraph's sentence to remove "vision" since the component model, while still evolving in certain areas, is very real and not vaporware. I think a casual reader could be accidentally misled by "vision" which could be read as implying that it is something we aim for but haven't attained yet, while that is not the case here.

Here is one word-smithing attempt, feel free to tweak as you see fit ofc:

```suggestion
"That means Asm.js was able to kind of coexist with JavaScript," he says. "You can call into JavaScript, and JavaScript can call into you." This design decision&mdash;later inherited by WebAssembly&mdash;would prove foundational, enabling everything from seamless browser integration to calling functions across isolation boundaries in the Component Model.
```

> "That means Asm.js was able to kind of coexist with JavaScript," he says. "You can call into JavaScript, and JavaScript can call into you." This design decision&mdash;later inherited by WebAssembly&mdash;would prove foundational, enabling everything from seamless browser integration to calling functions across isolation boundaries in the Component Model.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
"That means Asm.js was able to coexist with JavaScript," he says. "You can call into JavaScript, and JavaScript can call into you." This design decision&mdash;later inherited by WebAssembly&mdash;would prove foundational, enabling everything from seamless browser integration to calling functions across isolation boundaries in the Component Model.
```
I misspoke; they just do coexist.

## Neither web, nor assembly?

When someone defines WebAssembly, odds are even that they'll adapt the old joke about the Holy Roman Empire to say the technology is "neither web, nor assembly." That is to say, it's neither specific to the web nor *strictly* an assembly language, but rather a bytecode format targeting a virtual instruction set architecture. 

So where, exactly, did the name come from?

"We wanted *asm* in it because of the Asm.js heritage," Wagner says, "and we wanted *web* because all the cool standards of the time had *web*, like WebGL, WebGPU...we wanted to be very clear that this is a a pro-web thing."

The co-designers briefly considered "WebAsm" but (perhaps wisely) passed on that one. So "Asm" was spelled out into "Assembly." WebAssembly.

Bastien recalls internal resistance to the name. "We know it's going to be used outside the web," he says. "We're *designing* it to be used outside the web." But no other suggestions were forthcoming, and "WebAssembly" stuck.

This writer has certainly used the "neither web nor assembly" line more than once, and so did several of the Wasm co-designers I interviewed, but Wagner gently pushes back on the characterization. 

> "I disagree on both counts," he says. "An assembly language isn't a well-defined concept. It's just a language that's rather low-level, that's not bits and bytes. WebAssembly is that&mdash;low-level enough, but not machine code&mdash;so I feel like it *is* assembly. And then people say it's not 'web' because it's being used outside the web. Well, what's the definition of the web? Is it only things in browsers, or is it those things defined by open standards that interoperate with each other? I would say it's the latter."

Reviewer: Do you mind if I refine my original words and replace "that's rather low-level, that's not bits and bytes" with "that's low-level enough that you can compile your other languages to it, but it's not yet pure machine code" and replace "Is it only things in browsers, ... I would say it's the latter." with "Is it only things in browsers?  The W3C paints a much broader picture of the [open web platform](https://www.w3.org/standards/) that I think covers a lot more of the places where WebAssembly runs today and where we want it to run in the future".

> "I disagree on both counts," he says. "An assembly language isn't a well-defined concept. It's just a language that's low-level enough that you can compile your other languages to it, but it's not yet pure machine code. WebAssembly is that&mdash;low-level enough, but not machine code&mdash;so I feel like it *is* assembly. And then people say it's not 'web' because it's being used outside the web. Well, what's the definition of the web? Is it only things in browsers? The W3C paints a much broader picture of the [open web platform](https://www.w3.org/standards/) that I think covers a lot more of the places where WebAssembly runs today and where we want it to run in the future."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Setting aside the asm.js path dependency, perhaps 'bytecode' or 'intermediate language' would've been a bit more accurate," he says, "but when people say it's not 'web' because it's being used outside the web... well, what's the definition of the web? Is it only things in browsers? The W3C paints a much broader picture of the [open web platform](https://www.w3.org/standards/) that I think covers a lot more of the places where WebAssembly runs today and where we want it to run in the future."
```
(So sorry to edit this yet again, but I decided I'd not like to take a permanent stand on WebAssembly simply being an assembly language :)

## "Ship as fast as you humanly can before this whole coalition falls apart."

With the Chrome and Firefox teams on the same page, the co-designers turned to the teams at Apple and Microsoft. 

> Microsoft's Chakra team, which powered the Edge browser's JavaScript engine, had already implemented Asm.js optimizations&mdash;Wagner had personally relicensed Mozilla source code to make adoption easier. After some "intense Q&A" (in Wagner's words), the Chakra team got on board. At Apple, JavaScriptCore team lead Phil Pizlo was instrumental in securing buy-in.

Reviewer 5: s/Phil/Fil/

Author: Thanks!

> Microsoft's Chakra team, which powered the Edge browser's JavaScript engine, had already implemented Asm.js optimizations&mdash;Wagner had personally relicensed Mozilla source code to make adoption easier. After some "intense Q&A" (in Wagner's words), the Chakra team got on board. At Apple, JavaScriptCore team lead Phil Pizlo was instrumental in securing buy-in.

Reviewer: I think it's either "Fil" or "Filip" Pizlo: http://www.filpizlo.com/.  And it might be fun to tack on "yes, the same Fil of the Fil-C".

The formal announcement was coordinated: on June 17, 2015, all four browsers simultaneously released blogs linking to each other. Brendan Eich, then Mozilla CTO, [posted his own blog](https://brendaneich.com/2015/06/from-asm-js-to-webassembly/), giving the project the imprimatur of JavaScript's creator, and riffing on his trademark close to presentations:

> I usually finish with a joke: “Always bet on JS”. I look forward to working “and wasm” into that line — no joke.

As the project progressed, Lin Clark's communication was instrumental in building community understanding, such as in Mozilla blogs like [Creating and working with WebAssembly modules](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2017/02/creating-and-working-with-webassembly-modules/).

> For the group working on Wasm, the pressure to ship was intense. "Ship as fast as you humanly can before this whole coalition falls apart," was the prevailing sentiment, according to Wagner. In retrospect, the urgency proved prescient. Had WebAssembly been delayed, the [Spectre vulnerability](https://spectreattack.com/)&mdash;disclosed in early 2018&mdash;might have complicated the threading story and handed ammunition to those who preferred PNaCl's out-of-process isolation model. Firefox shipped first in March 2017, with Chrome following weeks later. By the end of the year, all four major browsers supported WebAssembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the group working on Wasm, the pressure to ship was intense. "Ship as fast as you humanly can before this whole coalition falls apart," was the prevailing sentiment, according to Wagner. In retrospect, the urgency proved prescient. Had WebAssembly been delayed, the [Spectre vulnerability](https://spectreattack.com/)&mdash;disclosed in early 2018&mdash;might have [complicated](https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2018/01/03/mitigations-landing-new-class-timing-attack) the [threading story](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/meltdown-spectre#high-resolution_timers) and handed ammunition to those who preferred PNaCl's out-of-process isolation model. Firefox shipped first in March 2017, with Chrome following weeks later. By the end of the year, all four major browsers supported WebAssembly.
```
Maybe some useful color?

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hSeB9I_mK6A?si=qeryPFGP1EmUeOux" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

"I realized that not only was it Zynga, not only was it Unity, but also Adobe wants to ship Photoshop and Google Earth wants to ship a new version of Google Earth," Titzer says. "I realized that there's all these huge applications that want to come onto the platform, and they're treating it as a real thing. That, I think, is the point where I realized this is actually going to be something that makes a huge difference."

## "Name an API in the world and it's in scope."

> Asm.js answered the hardest questions for the WebAssembly MVP: What is the security model? What features are in scope? When someone proposed adding coroutines or stack switching, the response was simple, according to Gohman: "That's not in Asm.js. Out of scope. End of story." 

Reviewer 3: I think it’s worth saying that it was the guiding light, but we did allow a few things that weren’t first class in asm.js. They were heavily debated!

> The next phase of WebAssembly's evolution offered no such constraints. With the core spec shipped and browsers onboard, attention turned to running WebAssembly outside the browser&mdash;on servers, at the edge, in embedded systems. This meant defining WASI, the [WebAssembly System Interface](https://wasi.dev/), and eventually the [Component Model](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/introduction.html). Together, these specifications could allow Wasm binaries to not only run native code, but communicate with one another. These "Wasm components" would be able to securely interoperate regardless of the language they were written in.

Reviewer 2: > not only run native code

This reads a little ambiguous to me. Is it intending to say

* that wasm compiles to native code, or
* that wasm allows porting native applications to the web

?

Also, strictly speaking Wasm does *not* run native code (e.g. x86-64 or aarch64 instructions) -- at least not without an emulator that is compiled to Wasm, which is pretty far into the weeds at this point -- which is a large part of what makes it a portable bytecode.

Anyways, my point is that it is worth clarifying and removing ambiguity from this phrase.

Author: Yeah, makes sense -- simplified the syntax to sidestep the ambiguity.

The design space was suddenly vast.

> "What surprised me most is how hard it was to figure out what to do for Wasm outside the browser, if not copy POSIX," Wagner says. The Unix-style approach was tempting&mdash;just give WebAssembly modules access to files, sockets, and processes in the familiar way. But Wagner saw a trap. "If you just copy POSIX, you're just going to have to reimplement containers but with Wasm on the inside. And that's not that much better than containers."

Reviewer 2: Suggestion, take it or leave it ofc, but: Luke's last sentence is lacking any discussion of *why* it is not much better than containers. Different readers with different priors can easily read that and think to themselves both "it is obviously way better than containers!" and "it is obviously way worse than containers!". My suggestion is to cut off that quote's last sentence and instead expand on its intent a bit by naming some concrete pros and cons of the approach (but without going into the nitty gritty details).

Here is my attempt:

```suggestion
"What surprised me most is how hard it was to figure out what to do for Wasm outside the browser, if not copy POSIX," Wagner says. The Unix-style approach was tempting&mdash;just give WebAssembly modules access to files, sockets, and processes in the familiar way. But Wagner saw a trap. "If you just copy POSIX, you're just going to have to reimplement containers but with Wasm on the inside,"  which is not an unambiguous win: it provides portability, but imposes execution overhead.
```

> "What surprised me most is how hard it was to figure out what to do for Wasm outside the browser, if not copy POSIX," Wagner says. The Unix-style approach was tempting&mdash;just give WebAssembly modules access to files, sockets, and processes in the familiar way. But Wagner saw a trap. "If you just copy POSIX, you're just going to have to reimplement containers but with Wasm on the inside,"  which is not an unambiguous win: it provides portability, but imposes execution overhead.

Reviewer: I'd replace "provides portability" with "somewhat improves portability" (since much of container importability has nothing to do with the ISA, but rather the OS, contents of fs, network address space, reachable services, etc, which wasm does nothing to address).  And then perhaps to close out the reasoning, maybe append "And if it's not a significant improvement, why do a bunch of work on it."

Reviewer 3: Yeah I think the distinction here is: portability of the implementation, or of the code running inside? The writeup sounds like the earlier, but the intent is the latter.

Gohman, who went on to lead much of the WASI design work, recalls the early days as intimidating. "You add WASI to the mix and it's like, now we're going to add APIs to everything," he says. "Graphics, networking, input devices&mdash;everything you can do from a browser, but also now we're in servers too. We're going to talk about databases. Name an API in the world and it's in scope for WASI."

> The challenge was compounded by the need to design cross-language APIs without the scaffold of existing standards. Should WASI present a C-style interface? A JavaScript-style one? An RPC protocol? The answer, eventually, was none of the above: the team developed [WebAssembly Interface Type (WIT)](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html), an interface definition language that could generate idiomatic bindings for any target language. 

Reviewer 2: Still exists and is still the current solution, so "could" -> "can"

```suggestion
The challenge was compounded by the need to design cross-language APIs without the scaffold of existing standards. Should WASI present a C-style interface? A JavaScript-style one? An RPC protocol? The answer, eventually, was none of the above: the team developed [WebAssembly Interface Type (WIT)](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html), an interface definition language that can generate idiomatic bindings for any target language. 
```

In March 2019, Mozilla [announced WASI](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/) and caught the attention of Solomon Hykes, creator of Docker. Hykes famously posted on Twitter: 

![If WASM+WASI existed in 2008, we wouldn't have needed to create Docker. That's how important it is.](/images/wasi_tweet.png)

The first iteration, now called WASI Preview 1, provided basic capabilities like file I/O and environment variables, but lacked networking and threading. Lin Clark continued to help communicate the vision for the project in blogs like [Standardizing WASI: A system interface to run WebAssembly outside the web](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/).

Five years later, in January 2024, the WASI Subgroup [launched WASI 0.2](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2)&mdash;also known as Preview 2&mdash;which incorporated the Component Model and expanded the available APIs. 

WASI 0.3 is on the horizon in 2026, bringing native async and cooperative threads, with a 1.0 release set to follow.

## The next ten years

> Titzer is now Principal Researcher in the Software and Societal Systems Department at Carnegie Mellon, where he has turned his attention to embedded systems and artificial intelligence&mdash;two domains where WebAssembly's core properties might prove transformative. He's been working on projects integrating WebAssembly into industrial controllers and cyber-physical systems. 

Reviewer 5: Since January I'm not a "Associate Research Professor".

Author: Thanks, updated!

Reviewer 5: Also I think I'd like to add "instrumentation and debugging" before embedded systems in the sentence above.

> "[Industrial automation companies] have the mobile code problem," he explains, "and at its core, if Wasm solved any problem, it's running untrusted mobile code." The same principle applies to sandboxing AI-generated applications. "You've got AI generating code&mdash;who knows what it does? Do you trust this code? No." 

Reviewer 2: Maybe define this usage of "mobile code"? It is something that many readers may not be familiar with, or may assume means "code running on a mobile phone".

Author: Good call, updated!

Bastien agrees. "AI coding agents are are pretty insecure right now, especially third-party plugins. Forget just injection, right? Like, I'm going to run a bunch of code I don't trust. Wasm is a pretty interesting fit." 

> Meanwhile, some of Wasm's innovations gleaned outside the browser context may return home. Wagner sees the Component Model reaching browsers, along with a proliferation of WASI interfaces. "I think there's at least a decade of Component Model evolution," he says, "where each addition unlocks more use cases. More and bigger kinds of software should just be [Wasm] components."

Reviewer: After "Wagner sees the Component Model reaching browsers, ", could we abandon the rest of the sentence and paragraph (which sound a bit vague and ominous) and focus on the value it would bring to the browser?  Maybe say: "Wagner sees the Component Model improving the quality of web developers' experience compiling their language of choice to run in the browser, either mixed into their existing mostly-JS web app or implementing the whole web app itself."

Today, WebAssembly runs in billions of users' browsers, as well as edge networks, clouds, and embedded systems. The project has achieved standardization and understated ubiquity. It's almost certainly running in one of your most commonly used apps, on one of your everyday devices, right now. What and where could Wasm be in ten years? The fundamentals of the architecture, going all the way back to Asm.js, stuck a toe in the door of a vast possibility space.

> In Gohman's view, WebAssembly represents "one of the few chances that the computing industry has at actually building something truly cloud native." It will take persistence, but for the first time in fifty years, he says, there's a chance to innovate at the boundary between kernel and user space. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Gohman's view, WebAssembly represents "one of the few chances that the computing industry has at actually building an execution environment that's truly cloud native." It will take persistence, but for perhaps the first time in fifty years, he says, there's a chance to innovate at the boundary between kernel and user space.
```

My words here lacked nuance. Perhaps it would clarify to also say: "Wasm combines an architecture which differs from what traditional OS's are designed around, starting with the trusted callstack, and broad relevance, starting with the Web".
